# monarch_diet
Effects of host plant species (larval diet) on wing morphology of adult monarch butterflies (Danaus plexippus)

This is a preliminary study investigating the effects of larval diet on an array of morphological measurements of adult monarch butterfly wings (Danaus plexippus). Our sample size (N=17) is very small, which warrants replication with a signfiicantly larger sample size. We are currently repeating this study with a sample size of (N=180), not yet accounting for mortality events. These preliminary results show that males reared on non-native, tropical milkweed (Asclepias curassavica) had significantly wider forewings with a higher aspect ratio and larger, more asymmetrical hindwings than males reared on native swamp milkweed (Asclepias incarnata). We found no significant effects of larval diet on female wing morphology. We used these two milkweed species because A. curassavica contains significantly greater concentrations of toxic cardenolides than A. incarnata, and we believe cardenolide composition is a possible mechanism behind morphological variance based on diet. We used two MANOVA tests, one analyzing factors associated with forewings and the other with hindwings, for statistical analysis, gauging the individual effects of sex and diet and the interactive effects of the two on wing morphology. Our results suggest a tradeoff between morphological traits that enhance flight performance and traits that assist in evasive maneuverability in males, which generally is used in pursuit of mates and in winning territorial disputes. Future studies should identify other potential drivers of morphological change and impacts on flight behavior, as well as emphasize the sex-differentiated trends we see in our results.
